# ENGR 301: Project Requirements Document

## Document Overview

The aim of this document is to specify the requirements of the system
your group is to build. The focus of a requirements document is the
problem you are attempting to solve: not a first attempt at a solution
to that problem. This document should communicate clearly to the
supervisor, client and course coordinator what the system you build is
going to do, and what constraints it must meet while doing so.

The document should also demonstrate your understanding of the main
analysis principles and quality guidelines, and applicable standards,
using tools and notations as necessary to communicate the requirements
precisely, unambiguously and clearly in a written technical document.
Page specifications below are **limits not targets** and refer to the
pages in the PDF generated from the markdown. Because the size of your
document is necessarily limited, you should ensure that you focus your
efforts on those requirements that are most important to completing a
successful system: if sections are at their page limit, indicate how
many items would be expected in a complete specification.

The ENGR 301 project proposal and requirements document should be based
on the standard ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2011(E), primarily sections 8.4 and
9.5, plus section 9.4 for projects involving hardware and ISO 25010
SQuaRE for systemic requirements. While excerpts from the standard have
been quoted within the template, to understand what is required it will
be necessary to read earlier sections of the standards themselves. A
supplementary treatment of requirements gathering in engineering
projects may be found in
[Requirements in Engineering Projects](https://victoria.rl.talis.com/items/F166DA94-DAD8-FBDB-0785-7A63C9BA3603.html?referrer=%2Flists%2F5886F297-2506-1F17-45D9-7F04CEE284EE.html%23item-F166DA94-DAD8-FBDB-0785-7A63C9BA3603)
(Talis). The requirements document should contain the sections listed
below, and conform to the formatting rules listed at the end of this
brief.

All team members are expected to contribute equally to the document and
list their contributions in section 6 of the document. You should work
on your document in your team's GitLab repository. While collective
contributions are expected to be the exception rather than the rule, if
more than one team member has contributed to a particular commit then
all those team member IDs should be included in the first line of the
git commit message. `git blame`, `git diff`, file histories, etc. will
be tools used to assess individual contributions, so everyone is
encouraged to contribute individually, commit early and commit often.
Any team wishing to separate individually contributed sections into a
single file before collation into the single proposal document for
submission is welcome to do so.

---
